% Options for packages loaded elsewhere
\PassOptionsToPackage{unicode}{hyperref}
\PassOptionsToPackage{hyphens}{url}
% !TeX program = pdfLaTeX
\documentclass[12pt]{article}
\usepackage{amsmath}
\usepackage{graphicx,psfrag,epsf}
\usepackage{enumerate}
\usepackage[]{natbib}
\usepackage{textcomp}


%\pdfminorversion=4
% NOTE: To produce blinded version, replace "0" with "1" below.
\newcommand{\blind}{0}

% DON'T change margins - should be 1 inch all around.
\addtolength{\oddsidemargin}{-.5in}%
\addtolength{\evensidemargin}{-1in}%
\addtolength{\textwidth}{1in}%
\addtolength{\textheight}{1.7in}%
\addtolength{\topmargin}{-1in}%

%% load any required packages here



% tightlist command for lists without linebreak
\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}




\IfFileExists{bookmark.sty}{\usepackage{bookmark}}{\usepackage{hyperref}}
\IfFileExists{xurl.sty}{\usepackage{xurl}}{} % add URL line breaks if available
\hypersetup{
  pdftitle={Tidying what should have never been untied. Collective Action, Capitalism, and Social Movements.},
  pdfkeywords={collective action, social movements, capitalism, class
structure, class politics},
  hidelinks,
  pdfcreator={LaTeX via pandoc}}



\begin{document}


\def\spacingset#1{\renewcommand{\baselinestretch}%
{#1}\small\normalsize} \spacingset{1}


%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\if0\blind
{
  \title{\bf Tidying what should have never been untied. Collective
Action, Capitalism, and Social Movements.}

  \author{
        Álvaro Cabrera \thanks{The author gratefully acknowledge Gay
Seidman and Pablo Pérez-Ahumada for their help landing this piece from
the world of ideas to the material world.} \\
    LACIS, University of Wisconsin-Madison\\
      }
  \maketitle
} \fi

\if1\blind
{
  \bigskip
  \bigskip
  \bigskip
  \begin{center}
    {\LARGE\bf Tidying what should have never been untied. Collective
Action, Capitalism, and Social Movements.}
  \end{center}
  \medskip
} \fi

\bigskip
\begin{abstract}
Political processes, social movements, and collective action inquiry
have a large and long tradition in social science research. However,
most of these studies have relied on traditional approaches to address
such research, ignoring the effects that capitalism has on politics,
political action, social movements, and collective action. This
phenomenon has been repeated all over the globe, particularly in the
Global North, in which repertories of mobilization, political processes,
and framing analyses have dominated the scholarly debate around
collective action. Although some theories have been influenced by
Marxism, none of them take capitalism and, thus, class as central in
their analyses. Drawing on Marxist collective action theory, Erik
Wright's class model analysis, multivariate regression analysis, and the
ISSP Survey (ISSP 2014 -- Citizenship II, N = 49.807), the purpose of
this paper is to examine the influence that class structure has on
participation in different activities of collective action. In
consonance with the theory, the results show that belonging to the
working class has a negative effect on participation in collective
action. Conversely, the upper classes show positive effects in
collective action. Lastly, belonging to middle groups doesn't show any
significant effect.
\end{abstract}

\noindent%
{\it Keywords:} collective action, social movements, capitalism, class
structure, class politics

\vfill

\newpage
\spacingset{1.9} % DON'T change the spacing!

\hypertarget{introduction}{%
\section{Introduction}\label{introduction}}

a

\hypertarget{social-movements-capitalism-and-class}{%
\section{Social Movements, Capitalism, and
Class}\label{social-movements-capitalism-and-class}}

\hypertarget{social-movement-classic-research-agenda}{%
\subsection{Social Movement classic research
agenda}\label{social-movement-classic-research-agenda}}

Social movement research has a long-standing tradition in academia. Its
development, some argue, started from what scholars have called the
``psychological'' approach \citep{eidlinSocialClassSocial2018}. Drawing
on psychological theory, this approach focused on the individual and
sought to understand the reasons that led actors to take part in
mobilization. To put it in other words, this analytical framework delved
into the internal factors that caused actors to participate and, thus,
create social movements.

Drawing on the limits of this approach, the resource mobilization theory
quickly gained adepts within academia, particularly in America, to
explain that social movements didn't occur simply due to individual
deviations but depended on the resources that participants held
\citep{mccarthyResourceMobilizationSocial1977}. As such, actors that
were able to mobilize a varied array of resources had the capacity to
maintain continuous participation in movements.

This perspective, although criticized, remained dominant for a long
period of time, even serving as a background for contemporary academic
work. Nonetheless, during the 1980s and influenced by Marxist tradition,
a new theoretical framework developed and served as a milestone for
social movement scholars. The political process model
\citep{mcadamPoliticalProcessDevelopment1999}, McAdam argues, is an
alternative to resource mobilization theory and the classical model
(psychological). In an attempt to synthesize the social movement theory
to date, the theory proposes that insurgency occurs when internal and
external factors develop collective action.

In McAdam's words \citet{mcadamPoliticalProcessDevelopment1999},

\citep{mcadamDynamicsContention2004}

\hypertarget{returning-to-capitalism}{%
\subsection{(Re)turning to Capitalism}\label{returning-to-capitalism}}

The classical social movement agenda led the research on diverse aspects
and perspectives on social movement inquiry. However, as Marxist
scholars have always argued, capitalism as a social structure is always
creating antagonistic forces that clash against each other, and this has
been demonstrated by the various conflicts throughout the world that
claim a reorder of the economic and political balance. The
\#OccupyWallstreet movement, the anti-austerity movements in Europe
\citep{dellaportaSocialMovementsTimes2020}, and the anti-neoliberal
movements in South American countries \citep{sommaNoWaterOasis2020} have
prompted many scholars to return to including capitalism in social
movements analysis.

Regarding the European scenario,
\citet{dellaportaSocialMovementsTimes2020} claim that recent European
state policies have prompted heterogeneous organizations, movements, and
other groups to walk to the street against such policies. In such a
scenario, the authors argue that

, although academia has left the political economy since 1970, it su

\hypertarget{class-and-social-movements}{%
\subsection{Class and Social
Movements}\label{class-and-social-movements}}

\hypertarget{plot}{%
\subsection{Plot}\label{plot}}

1

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{class-structure-and-collective-action_files/figure-latex/unnamed-chunk-1-1.pdf}
\caption{A plot example}
\end{figure}

\hypertarget{methodology}{%
\section{Methodology}\label{methodology}}

\hypertarget{data}{%
\subsection{Data}\label{data}}

This article uses a quantitative methodology based on the
\href{https://www.gesis.org/en/issp/modules/issp-modules-by-topic/citizenship/2014}{Social
Survey Programme 2014 - Citizenship II (ISSP)}\footnote{By the time this
  article has been written, another wave of the same thematic survey is
  under development and expected to fully realese in 2025.} (\emph{N} =
49.087). This dataset applies a similar\footnote{It is a similar
  questionary because the survey don't apply the exact same questions in
  every country. However, the questions are prepared to grasp and
  collect the same dimensions for every question applied.} questionnaire
in every country in which it is applied. The sampling procedure differs
for each country: in some countries, partly simple random samples were
applied, whereas in others, partly multistage stratified random samples.
The data was collected in two ways. The first one was through interviews
(face-to-face, Computer Assisted Personal interviews, or completed on
the telephone) or Self-administered questionnaires (Computer Assisted
self-interviews or Computer-Assisted web interviews). The analysis is
mostly applied to individuals that are 18 years or more with some
exceptions\footnote{According to the ISSP, the exceptions were countries
  such as Finland, were individuals between 15 and 75 were surveyed,
  Japan, were 16 years old and older were surveyed, South Africa, were
  the respondents were 16 years or more, and Sweden, were the
  individuals were between 17 and 79 years old.}. After processing the
dataset, the sample was reduced to 33.582 individuals nested in 34
countries.

\hypertarget{methods}{%
\subsection{Methods}\label{methods}}

\citep{huntington-kleinEffectIntroductionResearch2022}

The hypotheses that led this study were tested by calculating OLS.
According to Linear regressions are the ``\emph{best linear
approximation of the relationship}'' between two variables.

As the literature says, Linear Models are appropriate when we seek
{[}\ldots.{]}. In this case, since we are testing the effect that class
structure has on the working class participation in collective action
activities, other models that provide a better understanding of
probability, such as Logistic and Logit, aren't required. To put it in
other words, since we are not measuring the \emph{probability} that the
working class has to undertake collective action activities but the
\emph{influence} that class structure itself has on

\hypertarget{analysis}{%
\section{Analysis}\label{analysis}}

Prior to the statistical analysis, all the coding workflow was done
using R and its many packages\footnote{Most of the coding, wrangling,
  and analyses were used with tidyverse\citep{tidyverse}, haven
  \citep{haven}, sjPlot \citep{sjPlot}, sjmisc\citep{sjmisc}, sjlabelled
  \citep{sjlabelled}, summarytools \citep{summarytools}, car
  \citep{car}, openxlsx\citep{openxlsx}. For presentation purposes
  stargazer \citep{stargazer} and xtable \citep{xtable} were used.}.

\hypertarget{descriptives}{%
\subsection{Descriptives}\label{descriptives}}

\begin{table}[ht]
\centering
\caption{Descriptives Statistics}
\begin{tabular}{rllrrrrl}
  \hline
 & var & label & n & NA.prc & mean & sd & range \\ 
  \hline
3 & acc & Collective Action Participation & 33582 & 8.51 & 1.39 & 1.32 & 4 (0-4) \\ 
  4 & acc2 & Dummy Collective Action & 33582 & 8.51 & 0.65 & 0.48 & 1 (0-1) \\ 
  6 & css & Social Class & 36706 & 0.00 & 6.67 & 2.45 & 8 (1-9) \\ 
  5 & cs\_sub & Subjective Social-Class & 34224 & 6.76 & 0.96 & 0.74 & 2 (0-2) \\ 
  1 & AGE & Age of respondent & 36627 & 0.22 & 48.86 & 16.67 & 87 (15-102) \\ 
  2 & SEX & Sex of Respondent & 36696 & 0.03 & 1.51 & 0.50 & 1 (1-2) \\ 
  7 & partner & Living in steady partnership & 35142 & 4.26 & 0.69 & 0.46 & 1 (0-1) \\ 
   \hline
\end{tabular}
\end{table}

\hypertarget{models}{%
\subsection{Models}\label{models}}

\hypertarget{conc}{%
\section{Conclusion}\label{conc}}

\bibliographystyle{apalike}
\renewcommand\refname{References}
\bibliography{references.bib}



\end{document}
